### 1. Analysis of algorithms

Some of the main concerns when trying to analyze algorithms is to figure out how 'fast' they are and how much memory they will consume. These are important factors when it comes to writing complex software that has to do large calculations and handle big sets of data. In order to do these kinds of analysis we turn towards mathematical models to achieve a relatively precise estimations of an algorithm.

The approach is the same as used by scientist to analyze nature.

■ Observe some feature of the natural world, generally with precise measurements.
■ Hypothesize a model that is consistent with the observations.
■ Predict events using the hypothesis.
■ Verify the predictions by making further observations.
■ Validate by repeating until the hypothesis and observations agree.

A hypothesis must be falsifiable, which means that even though our hypothesis seems accurate it can never be fact because with only one wrong prediction it should be able to tell that it is wrong and needs redoing. 

With complex mathematic equations for our hypothesis we usually cut of insignificant values to simplify the equation. To show this we use the ~(tilde) symbol. E.g. If we have N^3 + N 3 then N^3 it is substantially large than N times 3. Which we would then rewrite to ~F(N) = N^3.

- **Time**

In order to calculate time you can run your application with different sizes of data and then use the stopwatch library found in most common languages, plot them in a diagram with x-axis being time and y-axis being amount of data. If you plot in your results in a log plot and get a straight line you can do the hypothesis that the time/amount is equivalent to the formula **T(N ) = a N^b**.

Knuth postulated that its possible to predict the running time of a program by determining two factors:

1. The cost of executing each statement
2. The frequency of execution of each statement

The cost of execution depends on the hardware and the language whereas the frequency is determined by the software itself. We usually look towards the instructions being run the most and refer to them as the inner loop. E.g.

``` java
for(int i = 0; i < 10: i++) {
  for(int j = 0; i < 20; i++) {
    if(i + j % 10 == 0) {
      System.out.printLn("We got a winner!");
    }
  }
}
```

In the above example the inner loop is the j for loop and the if statement checking for i + j modular 10 is 0.

- **Memory**

As with the time of running an application or a specific algorithm, the amount of memory that need to be used at a given point is also an important factor. The amount of memory used by an application is the same each time you run the application but can differ from machine to machine because of system differences in circuitry. Here is a list of typical memory requirements for primitive types:

| Type    | Bytes (8 bit) |
| ------- | ------------- |
| Boolean | 1             |
| byte    | 1             |
| char    | 2             |
| int     | 4             |
| float   | 4             |
| long    | 8             |
| double  | 8             |
This is as explained above device dependent.

To calculate the memory usage of an application we look at how many declarations are made. Complex data types are converted to primitive types so we are also able to easily include them in our calculation. So it is possible to count up the number of variables and thereby determining the memory needed to execute a specific task or application. But these calculations may vary from system to system. E.g. a 64-bit architecture uses 8 bytes for a machine address, hence the 64 bit.

To determine the memory usage of an object we take the amount used for each instance variable together with the overhead for the object which is usually 16 bytes which contains a reference to the object, garbage collection data and synchronization information. Usually we also have some padding e.g. an Integer object uses 24 bytes - 16 bytes for the overhead, 4 bytes for the int instance variable and then 4 bytes of padding. A linked list with integers uses 32 + 64N bytes - the usual 16 byte for overhead, 8 for reference instance variable, 4 for int instance variable 4 for padding and 64 for each entry where 40 is for the Node and 24 is for the Integer object.


- **Scalability**
- **Big-O**

We use the Big O notation to indicate the time of running an application in regards to the growth of data. The common orders of growth are:

| Description  | Function |
| ------------ | -------- |
| Constant     | 1        |
| Logarithmic  | log N    |
| Linear       | N        |
| Linearithmic | N log N  |
| Quadratic    | N^2      |
| Cubic        | N^3      |
| Exponential  | 2^N      |
This can then determine a relative 

- **Case**