### 1. Recursion and binary search

**Recursion** is a way of writing compact and elegant code. It is when you make a function call itself in order to complete a task and could be handle with a while loop with a condition. But the recursion method just makes it more compact. There are 3 important rules when working with recusions

1. The recursion has a base case - we always include a conditional statement as the first statement in the program that has a return. (If this does not exist we will have created an infinite loop).
2. Recursive calls must address subproblems that are smaller in some sense, so
   that recursive calls converge to the base case. In the code below, the difference
   between the values of the fourth and the third arguments always decreases.
3. Recursive calls should not address subproblems that overlap. In the code below,
   the portions of the array referenced by the two subproblems are disjoint.

```java 
// example of a binary search
public static int rank(int key, int[] a) { 
	return rank(key, a, 0, a.length - 1); 
}

public static int rank(int key, int[] a, int lo, int hi) { 
	// Index of key in a[], if present, is not smaller than lo
 	// and not larger than hi.
 	if (lo > hi) return -1;
 	int mid = lo + (hi - lo) / 2;
 	if (key < a[mid]) return rank(key, a, lo, mid - 1);
 	else if (key > a[mid]) return rank(key, a, mid + 1, hi);
 	else return mid;
}
```

**Binary search** is when you divide a problem in to lesser and lesser problems by always halving the data set. See the above code example. In this way we can ensure a O(log N) which is easy to prove as you always half the data set and in the worst case it will be at the final step you find the object in search or can determine that it is not present.