### 4. Merge sort

Merge sort is an algorithm that builds on the notion of merging two sorted arrays into one larger array. We look at what is called an abstract in-place merge where we want to reduce the amount of space needed in order to sort the two arrays and merge them. So what we do is that we copy to an auxiliary array and divide it into two halves, then we pick the smallest item from one of the halves and copy it back to the original array.

There are two types of merge sort:

- Top down: where we separate the array into two halves and then sort each of the halves and merge them together. It has at most 6N lg N array accesses.
  **Proof:** Each merge uses at most 6N array accesses (2N for the copy, 2N for the
  move back, and at most 2N for compares). The result follows from the same argument
  as for Proposition F. 
- Bottom up: Here we instead take a small portion of the whole array, and sort and merge that into increasingly larger chunks. This uses between ½ N lg N and N lg N compares
  and at most 6N lg N array accesses.
  **Proof:** The number of passes through the array is precisely [lg N] (that is precisely
  the value of n such that 2^N<= N < 2^N+1). For each pass, the number of array accesses
  is exactly 6N and the number of compares is at most N and no less than N/2. 



Merge sort is good because it offers close to the optimal N lg N compares which are the best guarantee a compare based sorting algorithm can offer. It is though, not the optimal when it comes to space usage, as it will create a copy of the original array which it will then copy to.