### 7. Job scheduling algorithm

In order to do a job scheduling we will need a DAG (directed acyclic graph), that means a directed graph that has no directed cycles in it. If this is the case then we are able to do a typological ordering of the elements vertices's in the graph. This topological order will then give us a list in which order we are able to complete all tasks with the condition that v has to be done before w. Furthermore each task have a duration we would then have to put into account.

The algorithm we use to solve this problem is a linear time algorithm know as critical path which is equivalent to longest path.

**Vesion 1**

We start of by finding the longest path in the topologically sorted graph and then remove the first element adding it to a priority list together with the total time, then revise the graph and do the task again removing the first element in the longest path and continue until all of the elements. In the case that we have two elements that resolve to a critical path we will remove both elements and putting the to the priority list. If all elements left only have a single referencing element that resolves to the same end element we can just add the elements base on the edge weight and finally the last element to the priority list.

Once the priority list is done you are able to assign task to the different processors, but remember that you still have to keep track of the topological order, so you are not able to start a task before prior tasks referencing that element is complete. So you have the priority list consist of objects that have data about when the task is ready, in progress and when the task is done. So when tasks are ready, the highest ranking task is put in progress, when done you take the next ready task in progress and so on and so forth.