### 8. Balanced Search Trees (including Red-Black BST)

Balanced search trees are a binary search tree structure that can guarantee ~lg N performance with insertion, searching and deletion. This is done by maintaining a height of the tree of lg N. The process of creating this balanced tree is by introducing what is called 3-nodes. Where our normal binary search tree have nodes that have one key and to child node references we now introduce a 3-node that has two keys and three child nodes.

The two keys in the node then defines the child node references as: left has a 2-3 search tree with values lower than the two keys, the middle child reference has a 2-3 search tree with values between the two keys and the right reference has larger keys. The main objective is to maintain a distance to null child references to be lg N distance from the root.

When inserting in a 2-3 tree, if the node we want to add from is a 3 node we then create a temporarily 4 node, push the middle value up the tree to the parent, if this node is a 2 node we just replace it with a 3 node - if it is already a 3 node the we just redo the process from that node, pushing its middle value up the tree. Thereby we retain a balanced tree.

So the big difference from regular binary search trees are that these trees grows from the bottom up and not by top down.

**Red Black BST** is an implementation of the theory from the balanced search tree, the code is pretty much the same as for a normal search tree but we add some additional information to the node. Here we represent the 3-nodes by adding a color to the reference, thereby tying the nodes together to form a 3-node. The red link then represent a 3-node with a combination of two 2 nodes. We then just use the same procedure as above. If inserting into a 3 node we will take the middle value and move it up the tree.

Rotation is done when we then delete from the tree. As the red link should always be to the left of the node. If we reach a case where the link is not to the right we have to rotate it because we would then have a lower value to the right, which is incorrect.

Rotate left in the case that the right reference is red and the left reference is black.

Rotate right if there are a red reference which references a node with a red left reference.

flip color if the left and the right reference is red and pass the color up.